Full Term (CMPA-3301-D01)PagesWeek 07: Overview

Week 07: Overview
Overview
 

This week, we focus on the final and most crucial phase of a project: the closeout. You will learn not only how to complete a project, but also how to learn from it. We will read the final chapters of both Project Management for the Unofficial Project Manager and Range, discussing the importance of a "Project Retrospective" and how every project is an opportunity to expand your personal and professional range. Your final assignment this week is a two-part peer review process where you will first submit your own project scope statement for review, and then provide constructive feedback to two of your classmates.
 
Learning Objectives
Upon successful completion of this week, you will be able to:

Describe the key components of a formal project closeout process (SLO-5).
Explain the purpose and value of a project retrospective for individual and team growth (SLO-3).
Provide constructive, professional feedback to a peer based on a defined set of project criteria (SLO-5).
Synthesize course concepts to articulate a plan for continued personal and professional development (SLO-1).
 

To Do List
The list of scheduled coursework for the week:
- Review: Week 07 Overview & Content
- Read: Project Retrospective - How to Learn From Your Work
- Read: PMUPM - CH 7
- Read: Range - Conclusion
- Discussion 07: Reflecting on Your Journey
- Assignment 04: Peer Review of Project Scopes - Complete both parts of Assignment 04, submitting your own work by Wednesday and completing your peer reviews by Sunday
 
Read: The Project Retrospective - How to Learn From Your Work
The Project Retrospective: How to Learn From Your Work
 

At the end of a project, it's tempting to breathe a sigh of relief and move on. But as Project Management for the Unofficial Project Manager Chapter 7 explains, the most crucial work often happens after the work is "done."

The final step is to close the project, and the most valuable part of closing is the retrospective.
This retrospective is where we learn a tremendous amount.
— A project without a retrospective is a missed opportunity to learn and improve.
— A project without a retrospective is a very bad idea.

Trying to close a project without a retrospective is like running an experiment and never analyzing the results.
— What was the point if the results weren't analyzed?
— What was the point if nothing was learned?

As David Epstein (2019) argues in the conclusion of Range, our goal should be to "expand our range" through experimentation. A retrospective is a method for analyzing the results of our experiment/project. 

"Compare yourself to yourself yesterday, not to younger people who aren’t you. Everyone progresses at a different rate, so don’t let anyone else make you feel behind. You probably don’t even know where exactly you’re going, so feeling behind doesn’t help.
Instead... start planning experiments.
Approach your own personal voyage and projects like Michelangelo approached a block of marble, willing to learn and adjust as you go, and even to abandon a previous goal and change directions entirely should the need arise.
Even when you move on from an area of work or an entire domain, that experience is not wasted."

—Epstein, 2019, Conclusion

The Three Key Questions
A project retrospective doesn't have to be complicated. It revolves around three simple but powerful questions:

Retrospective Key Question #1. What went well?
- What should we be sure to do again?

Retrospective Key Question #2. What went wrong?
- What should we avoid in the future?

Retrospective Key Question #3. 
- What will we do differently next time?
What specific, actionable changes can we make to our process?
These questions are simple, powerful, and broadly applicable to almost any type of personal or professional project. As a hybrid worker dealing with technical online computing technologies, tools, and processes, you should approach each project as a new experience from which you will learn and improve.

A Blameless Process
The most important rule of a retrospective is that it is blameless. The goal is not to find out who made a mistake; it is to find out why the mistake was made and how to improve the process so the same mistake doesn't happen again.
This blameless process approach builds trust and psychological safety, which are essential for effective teams.

As PMUPM states, 
"A key reason for formally closing out your project is to document what you’ve learned along the way. ... Look at the positives and the negatives.
... The overall objective is to do projects better from now on, so it's in your best interest to be quiet and hear people out. If they feel safe enough to raise ideas for improving the process, they'll more likely want to play in the next game.
Your lessons learned can help the next project produce value faster, cheaper, and better."

—Kogon, 2024, Chapter 7

For your final project, you will also write a retrospective. This is your opportunity to transform the work you've done into lasting knowledge, elevating this single project from a simple deliverable to a stepping stone for your own growth and a key part of expanding your range.
Don’t be like the man who found a bag of gold, dug a hole, hid it, and then forgot where it was.
Your project documents are gold. Imagine the wealth of information buried in them for the next unofficial project manager—and it could be you.
If you can’t find the nuggets of gold you earned with such hard work, what a waste. Now you have to go back and learn those lessons all over again.

—Kogon, 2024, Chapter 7

Chapter 7 — Project Management for the Unofficial Project Manager

Chapter 7. Closing the project. And happily, or just end. Close mindset. Measure success and get
better. It was a cool sunny evening in April when Carl's first capitals event started in the
university's common area. He and his team had struggled all week getting ready for it, putting up
posters buying food and tweeting, mailing, and calling students day and night. They had dug up a
French DJ and blanketed tables with the clairs and cheeses. At last, the French students anxiously
opened the doors and Paris was open. All the international students came, but only a few locals.
Still, the kids had fun talking and dancing with each other, and to his delight, Carl watched Marta
conversing happily with one of the Brazilian boys. After an hour or so, Carl told the DJ to knock
off and sat down with the French kids, who were quite glum by now. They were clearly disappointed.
Carl tried to encourage them. Maybe it will take a while before the locals feel comfortable coming
to an event like this. It's rote, a French boy said. A big fail. Just then the French teacher, Sigi
Olsen entered. Sorry to be late, she said, as she glanced around. Is it over already? Did you have a
good turnout? The Swedish, they didn't come, the French boy spoke up. Sigi laughed. Their
Scandinavians, their shy, they'll come around. I think it turned out well. Carl winked at Marta, who
grinned back at him. A few days later, the director wanted a full accounting on the project, and
Carl was ready for her. I understand it was a failure, she said, looking primly up at him. Carl
wasn't surprised by this. The director was known for her directness. Before you make that judgment,
I'd like to go through this closing checklist with you. This was a clever move because the checklist
was actually the director's brainchild. Remember, she was a stickler for proper procedure. I don't
think the project is a failure, Carl said. We've scheduled two more events for the spring term, and
we've carefully documented the lessons learned, as you'll see here in our status report. The
director looked at the checklist, and read the lessons learned out loud. We didn't get the
participation from local students that we wanted. We now think advertising the event isn't
sufficient, so we're taking additional measures. Professor Olson is lobbying her department to
require all foreign language students to attend the events. We've asked the student council to
actively recruit people. We're announcing a drawing at the next event, a night in Bangkok. The grand
prize will be a tie massage. We think these things will make a big difference. If the students come
once and see how much fun it is, they'll be back. Carl jumped in. Plus, we're going to publish some
photos in an article about Paris and the student journal. The director was silent for a while. By
the way, he added, there are many ways to define success. He showed her a photo he'd taken of Marda
and the Brazilian boy. Well, what do you think? As she gaze at the photo, Carl jumped in again. So,
with your permission, I'd like to launch a new project, very similar to the one we just completed.
I'll do a few things differently now that I have documented lessons learned, and with the term over
and most of my students leaving. This means I need to build a whole new team, but we made some
progress last time. I think it is worth doing again. All right, the director said, smiling despite
herself. Let's try it again. But I want a full accounting at term end. Carl knew there would be no
new project next academic year if he couldn't show a return on the investment. But in his mind,
there had already been a considerable return. Way back in chapter one, we defined a project as
having a beginning and end. There is no such thing as an ongoing project that would be an oxymoron.
So, Carl is wisely getting ready to close this year's project and then start a similar but new
project next year. The closing process, generating, gathering, and disseminating information to
formalize project completion, including evaluating the project and compiling lessons learned for use
in planning future projects. Pembok 3.3 Why close the project? Closing the project is a process in
itself. Of course, it means getting sign-offs on final deliveries, disbanding the team, and
archiving records. That's all administrative stuff. But the most important reason for formally
closing the project is to formalize the learning. Whether the project succeeded or not, many lessons
were learned along the way, and in some cases, those lessons are the most valuable outcomes of the
project, because the learning sets you up for future project success. Tool. Closing checklist How do
you know when the project is over? It may seem the answer is obvious when it's done, but you won't
really know if the project is over until you go through the closed checklist. View the closed
checklist template on page 29 of the accompanying pdf. Closed checklist project name prepared by
date. For each item listed, check either done or NA. Evaluate task list. Confirm fulfillment of
project scope. Confirm fulfillment of all project change requests. Complete procurement closure.
Document lessons learned. Submit final status report to key stakeholders. Seek feedback from key
stakeholders. Obtain all necessary sign-offs. Archive project documents. Publish success. Celebrate
project clothes with rewards and recognition. Of course, every project has different requirements.
Some of these items won't apply to your project, but reviewing each item ensures that your project
is thoroughly done. You might want to hold a stakeholder meeting to review this checklist or just go
through it yourself. Let's look closely at some of the checklist items. Evaluate task list. This
means going back over the project tasks to make sure everything has been finished. It's an
inspection. Construction people call this a punch list. They walk through the building at the end of
construction and list all the little things that still need attention. A light bulb is missing, a
screw is loose, a section of wall is still unpainted, a piece of molding isn't in place, and so
forth. Usually, the building contract isn't fulfilled until every item on the list is punched. They
used to punch a little hole in the margin of the document next to a finished task. The same is true
of your project. The principle of accountability means no loose ends. If the key stakeholders don't
see the need to walk through the closing process with you, ask them, do you want it done or done
done? Olivia was never happier than the day they opened the doors to the new building. With a little
creative thinking from the team and the help of a new recruiting company, she had managed to fill
every position without going over budget. The finance department had helped shift dollars from the
relocation package and even found enough money to provide a bonus to employees who agreed to stay on
and train their replacements. This solution caused far less than outsourcing training and was a
great morale booster. Not only was the training better and more relevant, but the employees who
weren't making the move now had a reason to stay 100% engaged in the ongoing success of the company.
Though they had a few hiccups in the early stages, Olivia had even managed to get the customer
satisfaction scores to the level they'd been at before the move was announced, in part because she
had communicated with customers along the way. Making them aware of the changes had been a great
idea. They had been more patient and less demanding of the new team. Days before the opening, Olivia
had met with the key stakeholders to go over each of the deliverables from the project schedule. As
they wrapped up the meeting, she reiterated what had been accomplished. 100% of the open positions
have been filled and though training will continue, 100% of new employees have passed a skills test
for their particular job. 90% of the staff have already relocated and their reimbursements have been
paid. All of these employees have permanent housing. We do have a handful of people who will commute
for a few more weeks, but they have all assured me that they will be in the office's full time by
June 15th. Olivia felt pride bubble up again as she thought back to the meeting and the impressed
faces on her key stakeholders. She and her team had accomplished so much. Samir broke through her
thoughts. You did it, he said. He gave her a congratulatory pat on the shoulder as they watched the
large red ribbon fall to the ground and the doors to the new building swing open. Olivia turned to
grin at her new chief assistant. We did it, she said. Celebrate what you've accomplished but raise
the bar a little higher each time you succeed. Mia Hamm, champion pro soccer player. Confirm
fulfillment of project scope. This is where you answer the question success or failure. Did you
actually fulfill the commitment you made to do everything within the scope of the project? Here are
questions to ask key stakeholders and yourself. Did we meet the goals of the project? Are you
satisfied with the end result? Did we deliver in a timely manner? Was it worth the cost? Did we do a
good job of anticipating and mitigating risk? Any ideas for improving our process? You'd think it
would be easy to say if a project has succeeded or failed, but it's not. Failure, like success, is
sometimes a matter of definition and who's doing the defining. Some will love it, some will be
skeptical, and some will hate it. In closing a project, you have the speed up, slow down syndrome.
Imagine you're driving a tour bus through a great city. Some of the tourists will want you to speed
up, others want you to slow down, but most of them, the great bulging middle of the normal curve,
are just happy to be there. And if you feel like you've messed up in some respect, you're in good
company. The Channel Tunnel Mega Project, presumably managed by some of the most expert project
leaders on the planet, went US $7 billion over budget and produced disappointing revenues for years.
The US $5 billion Denver Airport ended up costing US $10 billion and had only half the expected
traffic the first year. Were these projects failures? One aspect of a project can fail and still
produce good results. Project management methods won't completely eliminate failure, but they will
help to mitigate it. Too often project success is based on two measures, time and budget. Of course
they matter, but another measure of success should always be whether or not you've achieved the
quality desired and the business results you set out to achieve. Lessons learned. The causes of
variances, the reasoning behind the action chosen, and other types of lessons learned should be
documented so they become part of the historical database for both this project and others. Pembok,
4.3.3. What if you've done the very best you can, but your project is still perceived as a failure?
Remember the four foundational behaviors. Be respectful by providing a safe and welcoming
environment for feedback. Listen first, without being defensive to the people who think the project
failed. Then, practice accountability. Follow this good advice from a project manager. Give some
serious thought to what you could have done better and deliver it to people in a way that shows that
some good came of the failure and you're a better employee for it. The stench of failure is the
inability to learn from mistakes. Demonstrate respect, listen first, clarify expectations, practice
accountability. Complete procurement closure. In other words, make sure you've satisfied all the
terms of the original project. Did all the bills get paid? Did all of the product get delivered?
Have you released other departments, vendors, consultants, and any other outside organizations from
their obligations? Have you balanced the budget and reported gains or losses to the right department
heads if this was your responsibility? Have all contracts been signed, approved by your legal team,
and filed correctly? These are just a few of the items that might make up your procurement closure.
Every company is different, and if a contract is involved, don't leave a couple of things to be
cleaned up later because you might not get paid. Auditors go over contracts and sign-offs, and the
couple of things could mean payment delays, unnecessary rework, and, worst case scenario, lawsuits.
Document Lessons Learned One of the top reasons for formally closing out your project is to document
what you have learned along the way. To do this right, you need to do another interview, this time
with your core team. It's a good idea also to invite anyone who has to live with the results. For
example, if you've built a new computer program, involve the users. If it's a new system, involve
operations people, and so forth. The agenda for this interview is simple. What was done well? What
needs to be done better or differently? What unexpected risks did we have to deal with? How does our
process need to change to meet goals in the future? The four behaviors come into play here as well.
Look at the positive things and the negative things. Ask the team to share what went well and what
could have gone better? Allow problems into the open respectfully. That means no finger pointing. As
project leader, you are accountable for the outcome, so don't punish people for raising issues. Do a
lot of listening and learning without getting defensive. Your goal here is to do a project better
the next time, so it's in your best interest to be quiet and hear people out. When people feel safe
enough to raise opportunities for improvement, it is proof they want to play in the next game. They
appreciate having a voice in the closing and are looking forward to working on the next project with
you as the leader. Submit final status report to stakeholders and obtain required signatures. Like
Olivia, you should call your key stakeholders together for one final meeting. Go over the task list,
confirm the deliverables, and report your success and your failures. Like Carl, make your key
stakeholders aware of any final steps you are taking to close the project. Strongly encourage them
to make an appearance at your closing celebration to recognize the team. And last, get the signature
required to document project completion. Archive project documents. When we ask people in various
organizations if they can find the planning documents and the documented lessons from previous
projects, the overwhelming answer is no. There is a story told about a man who found a bag of gold.
In his excitement, he walked into the mountains, dug a hole, and hid it until he could decide how to
use it. But his hiding place was too good. Though he went back into the mountains for years, he
never found the gold again. Your project documents are like gold. Imagine the riches buried in them
for the next person who was assigned to a similar project. If your nugget filled documents can't be
found, their riches won't matter. Your organization should decide exactly where lessons learned and
project documents will be archived. Make sure everyone has access and that projects are searchable
by name and type. When you have a great archive, this will be the first place every smart project
manager goes before starting a project. Publish your success. Let the world know what a great team
you have and what they've accomplished. Encourage the higher ups in your organization to acknowledge
team members through an email, text, card, or a company memo. You want your team to win, but you
also want them to feel like winners. Don't forget to publish your success via the proper media
channels. You may want to write an article for your company newsletter or share the results with the
world. Successful projects make great news stories and have powerful public relations value.
Celebrate project close with rewards and recognition. Celebrating is extremely important to closing
a successful project. How do you show your appreciation to people who have given a lot to the
project? You'll have your own style of celebrating, but you might want to remember a few things.
People like to be thanked personally. A personal note goes a long way. Host a brief celebration
meeting. Ensure that some or all of the key stakeholders attending are prepared to say a few words
about the team's success. Have some snacks. Food is a great reward. Make sure you are prepared with
something nice to say about each team member. Highlight the lessons you learned in the process. Let
them know you look forward to working together again on another project. It wasn't quite New Year's
Eve, but the hospital administration wanted to do something special for Eve's team. After all, they
had done what nobody thought could be done, so the traditional Brazilian trip to the seaside for a
little New Year's party wouldn't be out of line. Almost everyone came in traditional white for the
New Year. Dr. Salta, as usual, wore his dark suit, but kept his white coat on as if he were doing
his rounds. As the sun set, the evening was still warm and the waves laughed on the beach. After
dancing and drinks, Santa, the chief administrator, called everyone under a shady pavilion to say a
few words. We were all skeptical when Eve set a goal of ridding our hospital of HAIs. They
devastated so many of our patients, and it seemed there was nothing we could do to change the
situation. We've always been strict about hygiene, almost to the point of annoying some of you. She
glanced at the doctors who grinned back. But we didn't really focus on the problem as we should
have. Your team initiated so many excellent measures. You even have patients reminding us to wash
our hands. You introduced new plasma filters for procedures that might put patients at risk. Most of
all, you isolated an entire class of antibiotics in our pharmacy that were causing sea diff to
thrive in our patients. Our HAI rates are now the lowest on the continent, and people are coming
from everywhere to study how we've done it. It was always a terrible irony that people would come to
us to be healed, only to become more ill than ever in our care. So many who would have suffered and
perhaps even died. Well, they will never know what they owe to you. I know Eve will be
congratulating each of you personally. Everyone here contributed enormously to the results. But
foremost, I want to pay tribute to Eve. She thought of this project and managed this project, and
she was true to the project plan, yet flexible when required. She displayed a deep sense of
accountability and respect for you, even when you didn't deserve it. Some team members raised their
eyebrows, others laughed, and Dr. Saltis pointed at himself and gave Eve a good-natured nod. Sent a
concluded. I think you will all agree Eve was a great project leader, a round of applause, and even
a few hoots and hollers came from the team. Thanks, Eve said, laughing at her team members. In the
end, they'd all come together. It was really all of you who made this possible. Thanks for sticking
with me. Everyone raised their glasses to toast. Just one more thing, Eve said. I think there might
be a way to solve, but before she could finish, someone lovingly yelled, no more projects, and the
team ran up to hug her. To sum up. Clothes, skill set, and tool set. Skill, evaluate task list.
Skill, confirm fulfillment of project scope. Skill, complete procurement closure. Skill, document
lessons learned. Skill, submit final status report to stakeholders and obtain required signatures.
Skill, archive project documents. Skill, publish success. Skill, celebrate project clothes with
rewards and recognition. Tool, closing checklist. Check your learning, closing the project. Why
close projects? How do you carry forward the lessons learned?



RANGE
C O N C L U S I O N
Expanding Your Range

WHEN I BEGAN to write and speak about data indicating that athletes who go
on to become elite are usually not early specializers, the reactions
(particularly from parents) reliably fell into two categories: (1) Simple
disbelief, can’t be true; and (2) “So, in one sentence, what is the advice?”
What one sentence of advice can encapsulate the embrace of breadth and
the journey of experimentation that is necessary if you want, like Van Gogh
or Andre Geim or Frances Hesselbein, to arrive at a place optimized for you
alone? Like the paths of those individuals, my exploration of breadth and
specialization was inefficient, and what began as a search for one sentence
of advice ended in this book.
Told in retrospect for popular media, stories of innovation and self-
discovery can look like orderly journeys from A to B. Sort of like how
inspirational-snippet accounts of the journeys of elite athletes appear
straightforward, but the stories usually get murkier when examined in depth
or over time. The popular notion of the Tiger path minimizes the role of
detours, breadth, and experimentation. It is attractive because it is a tidy
prescription, low on uncertainty and high on efficiency. After all, who
doesn’t like a head start? Experimentation is not a tidy prescription, but it is
common, and it has advantages, and it requires more than the typical
motivational-poster lip service to a tolerance for failure. Breakthroughs are
high variance.
Creativity researcher Dean Keith Simonton has shown that the more
work eminent creators produced, the more duds they churned out, and the
higher their chances of a supernova success. Thomas Edison held more than
a thousand patents, most completely unimportant, and was rejected for
many more. His failures were legion, but his successes—the mass-market
light bulb, the phonograph, a precursor to the film projector—were
earthshaking. Sandwiched between King Lear and Macbeth, Shakespeare
quilled Timon of Athens. Sculptor Rachel Whiteread achieved a feat akin to
Geim’s Ig Nobel/Nobel double: she was the first woman ever to win the
Turner Prize—a British award for the best artistic production of the year—
and also the “Anti-Turner Prizer” for the worst British artist. And she won
them in the same year. When I was researching the history of video games
to write about Nintendo, I learned that a now-psychotherapist named
Howard Scott Warshaw was once an Atari video game designer who used
extremely constrained technology in a resourceful way to make the sci-fi
game Yar’s Revenge. It was the bestselling original title for Atari’s 2600
console during the early-1980s when Atari became the fastest-growing
company in U.S. history. The very same year, Warshaw designed the Atari
adaptation of the film E.T. Again, he experimented with limited technology.
This time, the game flopped so badly that it was pronounced the biggest
commercial failure in video game history and blamed for the near-overnight
demise of all of Atari Inc.*
That’s how it goes on the disorderly path of experimentation. Original
creators tend to strike out a lot, but they also hit mega grand slams, and a
baseball analogy doesn’t really do it justice. As business writer Michael
Simmons put it, “Baseball has a truncated outcome distribution. When you
swing, no matter how well you connect with the ball, the most runs you can
get is four.” In the wider world, “every once in a while, when you step up to
the plate, you can score 1,000 runs.” It doesn’t mean breakthrough creation
is luck, although that helps, but rather that it is hard and inconsistent. Going
where no one has is a wicked problem. There is no well-defined formula or
perfect system of feedback to follow. It’s like the stock market that way; if
you want the sky highs, you have to tolerate a lot of lows. As InnoCentive
founder Alph Bingham told me, “breakthrough and fallacy look a lot alike
initially.”
The question I set out to explore was how to capture and cultivate the
power of breadth, diverse experience, and interdisciplinary exploration,
within systems that increasingly demand hyperspecialization, and would
have you decide what you should be before first figuring out who you are.
Early in the book, I discussed athletes and musicians, because they are
practically synonymous with early specialization. But among athletes who
go on to become elite, broad early experience and delayed specialization is
the norm. Musicians arrive at greatness via an incredible diversity of paths,
but early hyperspecialization is often not necessary for skill development
and in the more improvisational forms it is rare—although, as in sports,
many adults have an enormous financial interest in making it seem
essential. Sviatoslav Richter was one of the greatest pianists of the
twentieth century; he started formal lessons at twenty-two. Steve Nash is a
relatively normal-sized Canadian who did not get a basketball until he was
thirteen years old; he won the NBA MVP award, twice. As I write this, I am
listening to a professional violinist who started when she was eighteen. Of
course, she was told to stop before she started because she was too old. She
now makes a point of teaching beginner adults. The tidy specialization
narrative cannot easily fit even these relatively kind domains that have most
successfully marketed it.
So, about that one sentence of advice: Don’t feel behind. Two Roman
historians recorded that when Julius Caesar was a young man he saw a
statue of Alexander the Great in Spain and broke down in tears. “Alexander
at my age had conquered so many nations, and I have all this time done
nothing that is memorable,” he supposedly said. Pretty soon, that concern
was a distant memory and Caesar was in charge of the Roman Republic—
which he turned into a dictatorship before he was murdered by his own
pals. It’s fair to say that like most youth athletes with highlight reels, he
peaked early. Compare yourself to yourself yesterday, not to younger people
who aren’t you. Everyone progresses at a different rate, so don’t let anyone
else make you feel behind. You probably don’t even know where exactly
you’re going, so feeling behind doesn’t help. Instead, as Herminia Ibarra
suggested for the proactive pursuit of match quality, start planning
experiments. Your personal version of Friday night or Saturday morning
experiments, perhaps.
Approach your own personal voyage and projects like Michelangelo
approached a block of marble, willing to learn and adjust as you go, and
even to abandon a previous goal and change directions entirely should the
need arise. Research on creators in domains from technological innovation
to comic books shows that a diverse group of specialists cannot fully
replace the contributions of broad individuals. Even when you move on
from an area of work or an entire domain, that experience is not wasted.
Finally, remember that there is nothing inherently wrong with
specialization. We all specialize to one degree or another, at some point or
other. My initial spark of interest in this topic came from reading viral
articles and watching conference keynotes that offered early
hyperspecialization as some sort of life hack, a prescription that will save
you the wasted time of diverse experience and experimentation. I hope I
have added ideas to that discussion, because research in myriad areas
suggests that mental meandering and personal experimentation are sources
of power, and head starts are overrated. As Supreme Court justice Oliver
Wendell Holmes wrote a century ago, of the free exchange of ideas, “It is an
experiment, as all life is an experiment.”

Discussion 07: Reflecting on Your Journey
Discussion 07: Reflecting on Your Journey
 

star.pngDiscussion Prompt
 

This is a meta-discussion. Reflect on your work in this course as a whole. We have covered project management principles, explored the value of having "range," and acquired new hands-on technical skills.

 

What has been the biggest "win" for you so far in this course?
This could be a concept that clicked, a skill you learned, or a piece of work you're proud of creating.
What was the biggest struggle or challenge you faced?
This could be related to the course, your job, personal life, and responsibilities, etc.
Based on the "Project Retrospective" reading and the conclusion of Range, what is one thing you will do differently in your next course or project as a result of what you've learned here? 
 

 

discussion.pngDiscussion Guidelines
 

1. Post your initial response in this discussion (due Wednesday).

Aim for ~150-200 words in length for your post in this discussion, reflecting on the prompt above.
2. Reply to at least two (2) classmates' posts in this discussion (due Sunday).

Aim for ~75-100 words in length for your replies in this discussion, responding to your classmates' posts.
 

 

Refer to the Discussions - Expectations and Grading for the complete guidelines, expectations, and grading rubric.

 

 

Online Discussion Will Be Graded as Follows:
Responses to Discussion Prompts should:

Responses to classmates’ postings should:

Have a title with this format: “Week XX DP, Name”. (e.g., "Week 01 Student Introductions - FirstName LastName")
Be made in a timely fashion to allow other students sufficient time to respond.
Include accurate information and be on topic.
Be thoughtful, organized, and analyze the information and/or question.
Provide connections to info from the textbook, real-life situations, outside academic sources, etc.
Utilize appropriate language, grammar, and spelling.
Include APA style citations. Please make a good-faith attempt to use the correct APA citation format.
 

Include at least two (2) responses to classmates.
Provide constructive commentary and feedback.
Add to the overall value of the discussion: *Simply posting a statement like "I thought you did a good job" or “I agree” will not count.*
Utilize appropriate language, grammar, and spelling.
 

 

clock.pngDiscussion Due Dates (Wednesday and Sunday)
You are expected to be an active participant in the online discussion forum. If you wait until the last minute to post, you are not allowing for any discussion; you are simply posting your thoughts.

Discussion Components and Due Dates
Discussion Component

Due Date
Initial Postings

Wednesday

by 11:59 PM Central Time

Replies to Classmates

Sunday
by 11:59 PM Central Time
All discussions must be posted before midnight Central Time on the due date.


Mark post as readSS
Sedwin Sanchez
Sep 22 7:32pm

Reply from Sedwin Sanchez
Week 07 Reflecting on Your Journey – Sedwin Sanchez

One of my biggest “wins” in this course has been learning how to use GitHub and VS Code. At first, these tools felt really intimidating, and while I feel more confident managing my projects now, it’s still not always easy, and I’m definitely not 100% confident all the time. Still, being able to track changes, organize files, and work with projects digitally is something I’m really proud of. The biggest challenge has been making websites since it’s not something I do every day. I’m proud of myself for pushing through and figuring things out, even when it got tricky. Balancing Life, School, and work, while trying to keep up with my assignments and other classes, has been tough at times, and it’s not always easy to stay on top of everything. Looking back at the “Project Retrospective” reading and what I learned about range, one thing I’ll do differently in the future is take things step by step. I’ve learned that skipping even one step can throw off the whole assignment, so staying methodical will help me stay organized and less stressed. This course has taught me useful technical skills and ways to manage bigger projects more effectively.

Reply to post from Sedwin SanchezReply
Like post from Sedwin Sanchez LikeLike count: 0
Mark as ReadMark as Read
Mark post as readNN
Nicole Nolazco
Sep 22 6:03pm
| Last reply Sep 22 7:34pm

Reply from Nicole Nolazco
Week 07 Reflecting on Your Journey - Nicole Nolazco

I think overall my biggest “Win” for the course would be creating y own personalized webpage. It was a very fun and interesting part of the course, and I had a blast picking out the colors and playing around with the fonts. It was something really new to me but at least now I can design my own webpage, especially since I’ve been wanting to do something that looks like myspace. I think the thing I struggled with the most would be making my code more concise and understanding the instructions. I think I tend to overthink, and I get super confused with the instructions even if its simply just submitting a markdown file. I always feel like there’s more to it and so I end up rereading instructions until I don’t want to even look at the assignment anymore. When coding as well I know how sensitive it can be when making corrections or mistakes, so I just feel like most of my code isn’t organized well and I’m too afraid to make corrections if I’ve already done it a certain way. I think I’m going to just continue to practice basically to see what works and what looks better when organizing to make my code look better and more professional. I also think for next time I need to be better structured when completing work and having a better schedule since getting sick kind of threw me off and backed up a lot of my work. Focusing on time allocation especially with lengthy projects would help so much and as I’m implementing now or well trying to it actually relieves so much stress off my shoulders.

Expand discussion thread from Nicole Nolazco
1 Reply, 1 Unread
1 Reply, 1 Unread
Reply to post from Nicole NolazcoReply
Like post from Nicole Nolazco LikeLike count: 0
Mark as ReadMark as Read
Mark post as read
Ramona Gloria
Sep 22 2:38pm
| Last edited Sep 22 2:39pm
| Last reply Sep 22 7:36pm

Reply from Ramona Gloria
Week 07 Discussion 07: Reflecting on Your Journey-Ramona Gloria
At the beginning of this course, I felt a sense of neutrality regarding my progress. However, by the third week, I found myself overwhelmed and questioning whether I had chosen the right path for my studies. My biggest struggle was the pace of the coursework and the complexity of the concepts I was struggling to understand, which left me feeling over my head. Despite these challenges, I experienced a significant win/breakthrough in my learning: I discovered how a website is constructed from the ground up. I learned that a fully functioning website is composed of multiple files, each serving a specific purpose, that work together in harmony. This intricate collaboration is what ultimately creates a live website that is not only visually appealing but also well-organized and user-friendly. Understanding this fundamental aspect of web development has been a major win for me and has reignited my enthusiasm for the subject. Kogon and Blakemore state, "Even if you deem your project a 'mixed success', your lessons learned constitute value to your organization and to yourself" (2024).

One thing I would do differently is to be kinder to myself and not be so hard on my progress. Throughout this course, I frequently found myself comparing my understanding of the material to that of my classmates. I often wondered if they were facing the same struggles I was, but I had no way of knowing. This constant comparison left me feeling inadequate and insecure, particularly when I struggled with certain concepts that seemed to come easily to others. As a result, I began to question my choice of educational path and whether I was truly fit for it. Epstein states, "Everyone progresses at a different rate, so don’t let anyone else make you feel behind. You probably don’t even know where exactly you’re going, so feeling behind doesn’t help" (2019). In hindsight, I realize that everyone has their unique challenges and that my self-worth shouldn’t be tied to how I measure up against others. Embracing my journey, with all its ups and downs, would have allowed me to focus more on my own growth and understanding.

References:

Epstein, D. (2019). Range: Why Generalists Triumph in a Specialized World. United States: Riverhead Books.

Kogon, K., Blakemore, S. (2024). Project Management for the Unofficial Project Manager (Updated and Revised Edition). United States: BenBella  Books.

 

Expand discussion thread from Ramona Gloria
1 Reply, 1 Unread
1 Reply, 1 Unread
Reply to post from Ramona GloriaReply
Like post from Ramona Gloria LikeLike count: 0
Mark as ReadMark as Read
Mark post as readCC
Cameron Combs
Sep 22 2:13pm

Reply from Cameron Combs
Week 07 Reflecting on Your Journey - FirstName LastName

Thanks to my time taking the Full Term (CMPA-3301-D01) course, I have gained many skills and have experienced multiple beneficial situations. I have a biggest win, a most challenging situation, and thoughts on how to improve my skills for future projects.

The biggest win that I have is learning Markdown coding language. This language has enabled me to create interactive and styled text. Markdown also allows programmers to structure text effectively for various project README.md files.

The most struggling challenge that I have faced in this course is using CSS coding language for Assignment 02. This assignment required students to effectively use CSS to style up a website created in a past assignment. This was my first time using CSS, which made the assignment challenging.

The Full Term (CMPA-3301-D01) course has given me the opportunity to use my project management skills to effectively structure and control many assignments. For future projects, I would like to value each task more within a project and seek more help when needed. I learned about these areas of improvements thanks to my time taking this class. This knowledge gained has helped to enhance my project management skills.

Reply to post from Cameron CombsReply
Like post from Cameron Combs LikeLike count: 0
Mark as ReadMark as Read
Mark post as readJD
Jeff Dolo
Sep 22 12:41pm
| Last reply Sep 22 2:45pm

Reply from Jeff Dolo
Looking back on my journey on this course, I think my biggest win has been really understanding how project management principles work in practice. At first, concepts like scope, risk management, and communicating with stakeholders felt abstract, but the assignments and projects gave me a chance to actually apply them. Seeing how planning, execution, and problem-solving fit together in real situations was a real eye-opener. I’m particularly proud of the projects where I could take an idea from start to finish and actually see the results of careful planning.

My biggest challenge, however, was managing my time. Balancing this course with work and personal responsibilities wasn’t always easy, and there were moments when I felt overwhelmed. But learning to prioritize tasks and stay organized has definitely been a valuable skill I’ll carry forward.

From the "Project Retrospective" reading and Range, I realized the importance of reflecting on the process, not just the results. Moving forward, I plan to include regular check-ins with myself during projects to review progress, identify problems early, and adjust my approach. I believe this will help me work more efficiently and keep improving.

Expand discussion thread from Jeff Dolo
2 Replies, 2 Unread
2 Replies, 2 Unread
Reply to post from Jeff DoloReply
Like post from Jeff Dolo LikeLike count: 0
Mark as ReadMark as Read
Mark post as readHL
Henry Lee
Sep 22 12:18pm
| Last reply Sep 22 3:04pm

Reply from Henry Lee
Discussion 07: Reflecting on Your Journey - Henry Lee
I have set to the side certain fundamental habits that have discouraged me from finishing my work. Reading immediately in the morning when I wake, working and not working in determined slots, reviewing as far back as the first week; all of these habits I have only begun to acquire. These make up a simultaneous win and struggle. My schooling has been patchy since 2023, and regaining territory on lost time has been a little painful. Simple things that should come easily have been etiolated in recent years. It takes continuous reminders to stay on track. Reading through range has been one of those reminders. Through its own terms and aims I've been able to identify core issues that prevent me from completing tasks. Though I'm far from where I need to be, I feel more prepared than usual to do what I need to get through to the end. Consistent, daily practice and review, combined with set expectations and negotiations with my work-time comprise the key strategies I'll be using to complete my next project. 

Expand discussion thread from Henry Lee
1 Reply, 1 Unread
1 Reply, 1 Unread
Reply to post from Henry LeeReply
Like post from Henry Lee LikeLike count: 0
Mark as ReadMark as Read
Mark post as readJS
Jeffrey Stein
Sep 22 11:42am
| Last edited Sep 22 11:42am
| Last reply Sep 22 2:59pm

Reply from Jeffrey Stein
Discussion 07 Reflecting on Your Journey - Jeff Stein

The past few years I had been enrolled at Weatherford College where I completed my AA degree, then I enrolled at Texas Tech. At Weatherford College, I felt comfortable and confident in my approach to taking classes because majority of the online courses where laid out in a similar format, so the expectation of fulfilling the class requirements was easily understood.  So, to me the biggest win for was not only completing all assignment on time thus far in this class, but getting acclimated to a new school. It took additional planning and time on my part getting used to the new structure of how classwork was presented to me. The lessons of learning how to track and adapt in this class really helped me in this transition. Kogon and Blakemore (2024) states, “Tracking and adapting means making sure the project goes as planned, on time, and on budget and delivers the value promised” (p. 144). Applying these concepts learned, I was able to meet the challenges in this course by realizing that not only planning my schedule was not enough, but I also had to be prepared for the unknown risks that might happen and react accordingly. The acquisition of these new skills provides me a solid foundation for my continued academic success in future courses at Texas Tech.

The biggest struggle was readjusting to learning coding skills after a significant period without practice. These skills had been acquired years earlier but have not been used since. Considerable time was invested in research and reviewing fundamental concepts.

After reading the conclusion of Range, I recognized that my career has been characterized by ongoing experimentation. I have pursued multiple career paths and initially perceived leaving one path for another as a setback. However, upon reflection, I see that each of my previous roles has contributed the necessary experience that ultimately enabled me to reach my current position that I greatly enjoy.

 

Kogon, K., Blakemore, S. (2024). Project Management for the Unofficial Project Manager (Updated and Revised Edition). United States: BenBella Books.

Expand discussion thread from Jeffrey Stein
1 Reply, 1 Unread
1 Reply, 1 Unread
Reply to post from Jeffrey SteinReply
Like post from Jeffrey Stein LikeLike count: 0
Mark as ReadMark as Read
Mark post as readDL
Dillon Loftiss
Sep 22 11:32am
| Last reply Sep 22 2:51pm

Reply from Dillon Loftiss
Week 07: Reflecting on Your Journey - Dillon Loftiss

The biggest "win" for me has been the entire course, I learned a lot and I look forward to the follow-up courses. This final project is going to be the biggest struggle but I plan on taking it one step at a time and just going through what I have learned the previous weeks. The biggest win may end up being the final project, taking pride in having completed it. 

There were struggles for me throughout the course but none were super challenging. It was more of stress and thinking I didn't know what I was doing. In the end all of those struggles I overcame, just like I will overcome the final project. 

Expand discussion thread from Dillon Loftiss
1 Reply, 1 Unread
1 Reply, 1 Unread
Reply to post from Dillon LoftissReply
Like post from Dillon Loftiss LikeLike count: 0
Mark as ReadMark as Read


Assignment 04: Peer Review of Project Scopes
Ungraded, 40 Possible Points
40 Points Possible
Attempt
Attempt 1

In Progress
NEXT UP: Submit Assignment

Assignment 04: Peer Review of Project Scopes
 

Open the peer review tool in a separate tab by selecting the button below.

 

clock.pngAssignment 04 - Due Dates (Wednesday & Sunday)
You are expected to engage with the material for the week. Assignment 04 is due on Wednesday (Part 1) and Sunday (Part 2) by 11:59 PM Central Time.

Assignment 04 - Due Dates
Assessment

Due Date
Assignment 04 - Part 1: Submit Your Scope Statement

Wednesday
by 11:59 PM Central Time
Assignment 04 - Part 2: Complete Peer Reviews

Sunday
by 11:59 PM Central Time
All assignments must be submitted before midnight Central Time on the due date.

Week 07: Wrap-up
Wrap-Up
 

This week, you learned the critical steps for properly closing a project and the immense value of conducting a retrospective to learn from your work. You also practiced the professional skill of giving constructive peer feedback, a cornerstone of effective teamwork. You are now fully prepared to complete and reflect upon your final project.

 

Looking Ahead
 

Next week is the final week of our course. There will be no new content.

Your entire focus will be on completing and submitting your Final Project, which is due on Friday, 3 October, by 11:59 PM Central Time.

 


